The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned people on Thursday not to go on cruises, regardless of their vaccination status, because of onboard outbreaks fueled by the omicron variant.

The CDC said it has more than 90 cruise ships under investigation or observation as a result of COVID-19 cases. The agency did not disclose the number of infections.

"The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads easily between people in close quarters on board ships, and the chance of getting COVID-19 on cruise ships is very high," even if people are fully vaccinated and have received a booster, the CDC said.

The CDC also recommended that cruise passengers get tested and quarantine for five days after docking, regardless of their vaccination status and even if they have no symptoms.

The omicron variant has sent case levels soaring across the U.S., including Florida, the hub of the nation's cruise industry. The state set another record this week for new daily cases, with more than 58,000 recorded Wednesday.

U.S. cruise lines have not announced any plans to halt trips, though vessels have been denied entry at some foreign ports.The demand for COVID-19 tests is soaring along with the infection rate as the omicron variant swamps Florida.

Tampa Bay's local governments reduced the number of free, public testing sites in favor of private providers before the holidays. Now they're opening new sites to reduce the lines at existing public sites.

Public vs. private test sites

Testing at a public site is free, whether or not you have insurance. The site may bill your insurer, however. Most do not require appointments, though walk-ups may have to wait in line. Check in advance.

Private providers such as clinics, pharmacies and urgent care centers may require appointments and may treat the test as a medical appointment, adding paperwork and time to your test. They could also charge you or your insurer, so call in advance to find out the insurance and cost requirements.

Wherever you get tested, bring your ID and provide your full name, address and contact information so you can receive the test results. And wear your mask.

Note:Public sites could close early if they run out of tests. Check your county government's social media accounts to see if they're still open before heading there.

Omicron is harder to test for

Not only is omicron the most contagious variant yet, but it may also be harder to detect. Rapid antigen tests appear to be less sensitive to the variant and may not detect early infections, according to the Food and Drug Administration.

Rapid antigen tests are popular because they can produce results in minutes, which is why they're available for use at home. A testing site should report antigen results within hours.

Molecular PCR tests are more accurate, but the results could take days to come in.

You may want to take multiple antigen tests to be sure you're negative. If your antigen test is negative but you have symptoms, you should take a PCR test.

Tampa Bay's public testing sites

Check in advance to see if the testing site is open during the New Year's holiday weekend.

Citrus County

Nomi Health operates a free drive-through testing site at the Central Ridge Community Center, 77 Civic Circle, in Beverly Hills. Open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays and from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekends, weather permitting. Call 904-295-0562 for more information. Click here to pre-register.

Click here for more information about testing in Citrus.

Hernando County

Nomi Health operates a free drive-through testing site at the Hernando County Fairgrounds, 6436 Broad St., Brooksville. Open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays, weather permitting. Appointments recommended but not required. Click here to pre-register. For questions about test results, call 904-295-0562 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.

Click here for more information on testing in Hernando.

Hillsborough County

Al Lopez Park, 4602 N Himes Ave., Tampa. The city of Tampa's site is open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., seven days a week.

West Tampa Community Resource Center, 2103 N Rome Ave., Tampa. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., seven days a week. Vaccinations and boosters are also available.

Progress Village Park, 8701 Progress Blvd., Tampa. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. seven days a week.

Click here for more information about testing in Hillsborough.

Temporary Hillsborough sites

Hillsborough County opened two temporary sites that will operate from Friday through Sunday over the New Year's holiday. Each is limited to 1,000 tests a day. Before heading to them, check the county's social media accounts to see if they've run out.

Lee Davis Community Resource Center, 3402 N. 22nd St., Tampa. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Friday through Sunday.

Plant City Community Resource Center, 307 N. Michigan Ave., Plant City. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Friday through Sunday.

Manatee County

Bradenton Area Convention Center, 1 Haben Blvd., Palmetto. Open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., seven days a week. Walk-ups welcome.

Click here for more information about testing in Manatee.

Pasco County

Nomi Health operates a free drive-through testing site outside the old Sears at Gulf View Square Mall, 9409 U.S. 19, Port Richey. Open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., seven days a week, weather permitting. Appointments recommended but not required. Walk-ups accepted from 3:15 p.m. to 7 p.m. Click here to pre-register. For questions about test results, call 904-295-0562 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.

Click here for more information about testing in Pasco.

Pinellas County

The Center for Health Equity, 2333 34th St. S, St. Petersburg. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekdays but the line will be cut off at 4:30 p.m.

A second public testing site is at 7150 114th Ave., Largo. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekdays but the line will be cut off at 4:30 p.m.

Click here for more information on testing in Pinellas.

Polk County

Drive-through testing at the Auburndale Testing and Vaccination Center, 245 E Lake Ave., Auburndale. Open from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Thursday. Open from 8 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on Fridays. Appointment required. No walk-up testing. Call 863-519-7910 to schedule an appointment.

Drive-through testing at Bartow Regional Medical Center, 2200 Osprey Blvd., Bartow. Open from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., seven days a week. No appointment required. No walk-up testing.

Drive-through testing at the Gil Jones Center, 3425 U.S. 17 N, Winter Haven. Open from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., seven days a week. No appointment required. No walk-up testing.

Drive-through testing at Lakeland Regional Health Center, in the D-E parking garage, 1324 Lakeland Hills Blvd., Lakeland. Open from 7:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and from 7:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. on Saturdays. Appointments required. No walk-up testing. Call 863-413-5907 to schedule an appointment.

Drive-through testing at RP Funding Center, 701 W Lime St., Lakeland. Open from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., seven days a week. No appointment required. No walk-up testing.

Pediatric testing:Lakeland Regional Health Center, Carol Jenkins Barnett Pavilion, 1324 Lakeland Hills Blvd., Lakeland. Open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., seven days a week. Children must have a doctor's order to get tested. Call 863-687-1203 for more information.

Click here for more information about testing in Polk.

Sarasota County

Dallas White Park, 5900 Greenwood Ave., North Port. Open from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., weekdays.

Robert L. Taylor Community Complex parking lot, 1845 34th St., Sarasota. Open from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., weekdays.

Drive-through testing site, 5400 Bradenton Road, Sarasota. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Saturday. (Note: Use the address 5400 Old Bradenton Road to find the site via Apple Maps.)

Drive-through testing site, Ed Smith Stadium, 2700 12th St., Sarasota. Open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., seven days a week. This site only uses PCR tests.In a potentially ominous message for Florida's cruise-ship industry, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Thursday that people should avoid cruise travel "regardless of vaccination status" because of the spread of COVID-19.

The health agency said outbreaks have been reported aboard cruise ships as the highly contagious omicron variant of the coronavirus has helped drive up infections.

"Even fully vaccinated travelers may be at risk for getting and spreading COVID-19 variants," the agency said on its website. "The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads easily between people in close quarters on board ships, and the chance of getting COVID-19 on cruise ships is very high, even if you are fully vaccinated and have received a COVID-19 vaccine booster dose."

The agency said people who travel on cruise ships should make sure they are fully vaccinated and get tested for COVID-19 before and after their trips.

The CDC notice came after months of efforts by Gov. Ron DeSantis and Attorney General Ashley Moody to fight federal COVID-19 restrictions on the cruise industry and to prevent requirements that cruise passengers show proof of vaccination.

A Tampa federal judge sided with the state in June and issued a preliminary injunction against CDC restrictions on the industry, while a Miami federal judge in August backed Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings in a challenge to Florida's ban on so-called "vaccine passports." The vaccine passport law blocked businesses from requiring customers to show proof of vaccination, though the federal judge's ruling only applied to Norwegian.

Appeals in both of those cases are pending at the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.

The CDC notice Thursday came as Florida and other states have seen massive surges in COVID-19 cases. Meanwhile, Orange County cautioned Thursday that case numbers could go higher after social gatherings around Christmas.

Orange County, which takes part in a program that evaluates wastewater for traces of COVID-19, said it received data Wednesday that showed "historic increases of COVID-19 remnants in the county's wastewater service areas."

"This data helps predict infections four to 10 days before we see changes in our community's caseload, allowing county leadership and medical professionals to adjust public health resources accordingly," Ed Torres, director of Orange County Utilities, said in a prepared statement. "Because both symptomatic and asymptomatic carriers of the virus shed remnants in their waste, this data provides an accurate picture of how the virus is spreading in our community regardless of the number of people tested."

Florida hospitals also have seen steady increases this week in numbers of inpatients with COVID-19, according to data released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

The federal agency's website Thursday reported that 4,433 Florida hospital inpatients had COVID-19. That was up from a reported 3,836 inpatients with COVID-19 on Wednesday, 3,148 on Tuesday and 2,406 on Monday.

While hospitalization numbers have increased, they remain far below the totals this summer, when the delta variant of the coronavirus spread through the state. For instance, Florida had 15,177 patients hospitalized with COVID-19 on Sept. 1, according to federal data.Florida's rocketing number of COVID-19 cases likely will peak by mid-January as the highly contagious omicron variant potentially infects most of the state's population during this wave alone, according to disease modelers with the University of Florida's Emerging Pathogens Institute.

UF biostatisticians and scientists said they revised their forecast for the state's omicron wave to account for the astonishing speed and breadth with which the virus was spreading through Florida in December, leading to record numbers of COVID-19 cases during the state's fourth wave of the pandemic.

The university's model still calls for omicron to cause fewer deaths than prior surges of the pandemic, and like past waves this one is expected to diminish with the same speed that it spiked - making for possibly one of the shortest though still devastating waves of the pandemic.

"Everything points to much faster dynamics than we saw at first," said Ira Longini, a UF professor of biostatistics and co-creator of the university's omicron model.

Omicron's shorter incubation period

To account for what they were seeing in Florida and the United States in December, UF scientists shortened the model's projection for omicron's incubation period to about three days instead of five days, which means that an infected person can begin spreading the virus about two days after contracting the virus, regardless of whether or not they have symptoms.

"If they're going to get symptoms, on average it's on the third day of their infection," Longini said. "So by then they've already been transmitting it for a whole day while they were still asymptomatic."

By comparison, the delta variant has an incubation period of about four days, which is faster than the median of five or more days seen in the original version of the virus, according to a recent report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Florida reported the state's first known case of the omicron variant on Dec. 6, and as the virus spread rapidly UF scientists quickly began to understand why the strain was causing an exponential growth in infections and reported cases, said Thomas Hladish, a research scientist in UF's department of biology and a co-author of the model.

"The increase was so pronounced that as soon as we had like two days of data about that increase, we could have at that point said quite a bit," Hladish said. "Most of what we would have needed to know we would have known."

Hladish said the most significant change in the model was shortening the time from when someone contracts the virus to when they become contagious.

Omicron's shorter incubation period explains why graphs of Florida's most recent COVID-19 wave show a steep, almost vertical line of ascending cases in December - information the UF modelers did not have when they created their initial forecast using data from South Africa for November.

And though omicron appears to cause a shorter infectious period than other variants, Longini said, people with omicron are more contagious during that time than those who contracted earlier strains of the virus. He said a typical omicron infection will cause a person to be infectious for about a week.

"Some people will test positive for many days after that," he said, "but it looks like the infectious period is about five days."

There is also evidence that omicron causes more mild disease than prior strains, though Longini said it's not clear how much of the disease's severity may be reduced by existing immunity in the population from vaccination and prior infection.

90,000 COVID Cases a day

As Florida nears the projected peak of the omicron wave in mid-January, UF modelers predict the state will top out at about 90,000 reported cases a day.

On Friday, Florida reported to the CDC 76,887 cases - the state's largest single-day increase on record for the pandemic.

However, variations in daily cases are highly affected by the reporting process, including the amount of time that passes from the day an infected individual is tested to the time a case is reported by the state.

Hladish said disease modelers are less certain about the exact number of daily cases that Florida will report at the peak than they are about the timing of that peak being in mid-January.

In fact, the model suggests that Florida may have already passed the peak of total infections - the sum of reported cases plus people who were infected but did not get tested due to mild or no symptoms or other reasons. But cases have not peaked yet because of the time it takes for tests to be processed and reported.

"We looked at many different assumptions in order to see what it takes to get the kind of extremely rapid growth in cases that we've observed, and we consistently saw that the peak was going to happen basically between like Jan. 5 and Jan. 12," Hladish said.

"The peak may well have happened in infections," he added, "but it's a funny thing with how testing and reporting works that the data that come out for today are not about today. It's really important to remember that."

Fewer deaths with omicron

UF's model for the omicron wave predicts that the total number of deaths caused by Florida's omicron wave will likely be about one-third less than the state saw during the delta-fueled summer surge.

Though omicron is milder than prior strains, the model predicts that deaths from the omicron wave will peak at about 300 a day "because of the sheer numbers of infected people," Longini said.

At the peak of the delta wave, Florida experienced about 400 deaths a day, he said.

UF scientists said death predictions could be affected by the arrival of new COVID-19 therapeutics, such as antiviral pills designed to reduced disease severity. But they also had difficulty predicting mortality for the omicron wave and analyzing death patterns from prior waves due in part to repeated changes in Florida's official reporting.

During the first 18 months of the pandemic that began in March 2020, data collected by the Florida Department of Health and reported on the CDC website counted deaths by the date they were recorded - a common method for producing daily stats used by most states.

But as the delta wave surged in August, the health department changed the way it reported death data to the CDC, giving the appearance of a pandemic in decline by counting deaths by the date they occurred.

In November, the CDC said it began to transition states to once again report deaths by the date they were reported.

Prior to the change in reporting deaths, Florida's health department removed its online dashboard and stopped daily reporting of COVID-19 cases, switching to weekly updates that no longer included county-level information on hospitalizations and deaths.

For scientists trying to develop a tool to assess the COVID-19 epidemic in Florida, the constant changes are a challenge.

"It really interferes with our ability to make sense of patterns, make sense of what happened when you're changing data collection midstream," Hladish said. "This has happened several times at this point, how deaths are certified. Then changing from daily to weekly reports. Some things that previously were released by the state now are released by federal authorities, and there are these persistent arguments between state and federal authorities about what the numbers should be and how to interpret them.

"It makes the scientists' job very difficult," he said, "when the criteria for collecting data keeps changing, and how the data is made available."

Longini echoed Hladish's criticism of the state's data reporting.

"The reporting is tricky, both deaths and cases," he said. "Things aren't getting reported that well, and there's delays. They do it in patches. They ignore it. It's really bad in Florida."

Future variants

One prediction that does not rely on data is what future variants of the coronavirus may mean for the pandemic, and on this question scientists do not always agree about the right answer.

Both Hladish and Longini said that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is here to stay. And they both believe that coronaviruses will tend to mutate toward becoming more contagious and able to evade immunity, whether from vaccination or prior infection.

"Those are clear directions that give a virus an advantage," Longini said. But they disagree about whether future variants will cause more or less severe illness in infected people.

Longini said "there's no way" that the virus will become as deadly as Ebola, which has a case fatality rate of greater than 50 percent. Florida's health department reports a COVID-19 case fatality rate of 1.5 percent.

"But I don't see a strong argument why the evolution of the virus itself would be toward less virulent strains," he said, "mostly because most of the transmission occurs before the person becomes sick enough, especially this virus, and I don't think it cares if somebody dies two weeks later."

Hladish said he believes future variants will favor less virulence or severe disease, though not for biological reasons.

"Human behavior matters," Hladish said. "Maybe with the first couple of people it's not going to matter if the virus kills the host because it already did its transmitting. But if you have a pathogen that's killing people left and right, then people are going to modify behavior and that's going to reduce transmission.

"You don't have to invoke a biological reason for why being virulent would reduce transmission," he said, "because there is a behavioral reason."

Yet Longini also sees a future where the virus that causes COVID-19 will become mild over time, not because of mutations in the virus but because of a rise in population immunity from vaccination and prior infection, similar to coronaviruses that cause the common cold.

"The long-term evolution in the population will be toward less and less severe disease," he said, "because more and more people will be either vaccinated or immune, and it could become a disease of very young children. Not because the virus is less virulent but because the population level immunity keeps rising, especially as people get older they're more likely to have immunity."

Longini noted that it's still not possible to measure long-term immune response to a virus that is barely two years old and for which vaccines became available in December 2020.

"But once you've been infected and/or vaccinated enough times," he said, "maybe you develop immunity to severe disease, which we clearly have against seasonal coronaviruses. They don't cause severe disease in humans anymore, but we get infected with them over and over."

· · ·The omicron variant is spreading like wildfire across Florida as it infects a record number of people.

The state averaged nearly 57,000 COVID-19 infections a day from Dec. 31 to Thursday, according to the weekly report released Friday. That is the highest weekly infection rate thus far during the 22-month pandemic. It is also more than 150 percent higher than the peak of the delta wave that swept through the state last summer.

Florida accounted for one out of every 10 infections in the U.S. last week and had the seventh-highest rates of infection per capita, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Case positivity also hit an unprecedented high, with more than 31 percent of the COVID-19 tests taken in the past week coming back positive. Those aged 20-29 have the highest positivity rate at nearly 36 percent. The lowest positivity rate was among those 65 and over, but even that is nearly 23 percent.

The highest concentration of cases was in Miami-Dade, the state's most populated county, where nearly 4 percent of its nearly 3 million residents tested positive in the past week alone.

The state recorded 184 deaths in the past week. Some of those deaths may have occurred in previous weeks, but were only recorded in the last 7 days. As new cases continue to mount, deaths have also climbed in recent weeks.

The Florida Department of Health has not released any data that shows how many Floridians have the omicron variant. But Gov. Ron DeSantis said omicron is "overwhelmingly" the dominant strain in the state. The variant is now responsible for 95 percent of infections in the U.S., according to the CDC.

"It shoots straight up unlike any viral curve we've seen yet throughout the pandemic," DeSantis said at a Thursday news conference. "But when it does peak it comes down very quickly."

The 397,114 cases reported this past week means that 4.6 million confirmed cases have been detected in Florida since the first cases were discovered on March 1, 2020. The death toll now stands at 62,688.

The best protection against omicron is to get vaccinated, boosted and to wear an effective mask, such as a KN95 or N95 mask, health experts say. But as omicron infections keep rising, the number of Floridians seeking the protection of vaccines keeps falling.

Vaccinations fell for the third week in a row, with just over 125,000 doses administered this week. As of Thursday, 72 percent of eligible Floridians have been vaccinated. That rate is lower among the youngest residents: 16 percent of those aged 5-11 and 59 percent of those aged 12-19 have been vaccinated. An additional 170,000 Floridians got their booster shot last week.

Florida hospitals are seeing the effects of omicron firsthand: There were 8,548 confirmed COVID-19 cases filling state hospital beds as of Friday, four times as many as two weeks ago, according to federal data.

There were 12,353 patients admitted in the past 7 days, a nearly 75 percent jump from last week. It's the highest number of new COVID-19 hospitalizations since the end of August. That number includes 570 children under 18 - the highest number of kids hospitalized in one week throughout the pandemic.

Tampa Bay hospital officials are watching anxiously as the number of COVID-19 patients they treat continues to climb.

AdventHealth's West Florida Division, which operates hospitals in five counties around Tampa Bay, reported 262 COVID patients on Friday, up from 62 one month ago.

At the same time, the hospital chain is having to deal with too many people turning at its emergency rooms looking to be tested instead of going to pharmacies or clinics, said AdventHealth spokesperson Ashley Jeffery.

"We are still encouraging people to not come to the ER for a COVID test," said Jeffrey.

The number of COVID patients at Tampa General Hospital rose from 29 on Christmas Eve to 168 on Friday, with 23 of those in intensive care.

One-quarter of Florida hospitals reported a critical staffing shortage by the end of the week. Less than 4 percent of hospitals were reporting a similar shortage this time last year.

At Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital in St. Petersburg, an increasing number of infected children are arriving at the emergency room there.

Almost 250 children tested positive over the past week. Compare that to the 17 children who tested positive in November and the 55 in December. Most underwent a medical examination and their parents were told to manage their symptoms at home. However, 13 children were being treated in the hospital for COVID-19 as of Friday afternoon.

The hospital is also dealing with flu season with 123 children being diagnosed last month. And school just resumed this week after the holiday break.

"We expect to get busier in the next few weeks with more children getting infected especially now they're going back to schools," said Dr. Juan Dumois, a pediatric infectious diseases physician. "In many cases, fewer people are masking in their schools."

· · ·

The city of Tampa joined Hillsborough County on Wednesday in requiring its employees to wear masks inside city facilities and in city-owned vehicles when traveling with other people, citing the surge in cases from the omicron variant of COVID-19.

In a directive issued to employees Wednesday afternoon, city human resources director Kelly Austin said members of the public ages two and older also will be required to wear a mask when visiting city buildings. However they will not be refused entry or service. The city will work to create other means to provide the service needed, which the memo says is in keeping with a state prohibition against mask mandates.

The directive indicated that all city employees are being encouraged to receive vaccinations and boosters as the most effective way of avoiding adverse health effect from the virus.

The coronavirus is once again messing with Tampa's stage schedules.

The David A. Straz Jr. Center for the Performing Arts postponed Jobsite Theater's production of Romeo & Juliet by a week in January. And a show called Drag Queen Christmas got canceled on Monday because some of the cast and crew tested positive.

"The Straz Center's rigorous testing protocols caught positive cases before anyone on the production team entered our facility and prevented any spread of positive cases," a statement from the center said.

The Straz Center has one of the more robust coronavirus policies among entertainment venues in the Tampa Bay area. When it reopened this fall after its curtains were closed for months because of the COVID-19 pandemic, it made testing and vaccine cards a condition for entry. Attendees age 12 and older must show a vaccine card or proof of a negative COVID-19 test for all indoor performances. Also, face masks are required for both the audience and staff inside the theaters.

David Jenkins, the producing artistic director of Jobsite Theater, the independent resident theater company of the Straz, said a member of his crew tested positive, so work had to stop for a week because of exposure. The person was vaccinated and is asymptomatic, he said.

The past few weeks have brought some high-profile cancellations in entertainment, including Saturday Night Live sending its audience and most of its cast home, and some Broadway shows have gone dark in New York. They were prompted by the recent spike in cases brought on by the omicron variant of COVID-19.

Jenkins said considering the vigorous program in place at the Straz, a postponement rather than cancellation was in line with advice from Tampa General Hospital.

"In 16 months, this is first time we had a failed test," Jenksins said. "We've done everything right, and because this person is vaccinated they are not sick."

But he said he had to consider the families of the 13 actors and crew in calling for the postponement. He thinks Jobsite's audience will support that.

"Our audience has been incredibly understanding and I think, frankly, more comfortable coming to the theater because of the steps we are taking," Jenkins said. "People who complain on social media were not buying tickets to the theater to begin with and are not our customers."

Previews planned for Jan. 12-13 of Romeo & Juliet will be moved to Jan. 19-20, and opening night will be moved from Jan. 14 to Jan. 21. Anyone holding a ticket to performances Jan. 12-16 will be contacted about moving to another date. Tickets start at $18.The student. That's the reason public schools exist in Florida. And it's the most basic, most important subject to keep in mind as Tampa Bay schools re-open this week after the holidays.

We are nearing the anniversary of two full years of coping with COVID-19 in the classroom, and it's easy to forget all that has transpired, from remote instruction, to missed graduations, to hybrid classrooms, to masks, vaccinations and testing (both of students' knowledge and their infection status). But it's important not to let the politics of federal vs. state vs. local vs. parental control obscure what should be the center of every discussion: our students and their education. That sharp focus, in turn, must be on the individual classroom. The teacher. And each student.

As the omicron variant swells to its likely peak sometime in the next several weeks, it's vital to see this from a student's perspective and life horizon. Third grade, for example, is a crucial year in the education of a young Floridian. A student who isn't a capable reader by the end of third grade can face substantial roadblocks that hinder her progress her whole life. For an adult, the pandemic has been trying. For that third-grader, it has affected her entire education. She was barely midway through first grade when school was disrupted by the pandemic. Nothing has been "normal" in her schooling. So as this week begins, what are the federal, state and local school authorities doing to make sure she is reading well by the time school adjourns for the summer? That young student, after all, has only one shot at third grade.

People can fight about masks, vaccines, equity, critical race theory or any other issues that seem to concern adults more than the children in the classroom. But are people directing that same energy to simply making sure that those third-graders can read? And that students in all other grades are getting the education they need and deserve? That should be the emphasis whether there is a pandemic or not, whether there is a "culture war" or not. Amid all the tumult of the past two years, too many have forgotten that education occurs in a single classroom between one teacher and her students. Give the teachers freedom to teach, and the students room to learn.

The pandemic will eventually pass, and the current hot issues in education will cool down, and something else will take their place. But the need to be able to read is constant, and decades after the pandemic has faded away, the student who didn't read proficiently in third grade could still be suffering from that deficit. That fact should be front and center in discussions about education in Florida.

The ability to read and to reason matters - for everyone. And it is in society's interest to have a literate and numerate cohort of citizens rising up to ensure the nation's future. After all, America will soon be in their hands. It's up to the rest of us to make sure those young citizens are equipped to take over. That starts this week when schools re-open.TAMPA - For the first 11 weeks of the season, the Lightning dodged COVID-19.

While other organizations around the league were forced to postpone games and teams shut down operations amid outbreaks, the Lightning were unaffected. They shared the ice with teams that days later lost players to positive tests.

But when the virus did hit the Lightning locker room, it spread quickly. Within the past three weeks, nine players and three coaches went into protocol, creating day-to-day - and sometimes hour-to-hour - uncertainty about who would be available to take the ice.

"I guess we expect the unexpected," forward Alex Killorn said. "Every day we come in knowing that someone might get pulled and mentally, you just kind of have to wrap your head around it knowing that the guys that are walking in in the morning may not be the guys that are going to play. We have to get these games in, we have to play them. So it's just kind of finding a way to win through these tough times."

Lightning assistant coaches found out 2 ½ hours before puck drop of the team's Dec. 21 game in Vegas that coach Jon Cooper had tested positive. The Lightning returned from the holiday break on Dec. 26 to a practice missing four players - including both goaltenders.

Forward Anthony Cirelli was pulled out of a team meeting because he tested positive, and forward Ross Colton was told he had to enter protocol after coming off the ice for morning skate before Tuesday's game in Columbus.

Even when players were able to return, it wasn't seamless. Rookie forward Taylor Raddysh was cleared Monday. He made it for that day's practice, but his equipment bag didn't.

"There's just been a lot of disruption," Cooper said. "We've had a multitude of players come in. Different guys are playing games, guys are getting their first games in. You don't know who's playing hours before the game."

The Lightning revolving roster door coincided with their most uneven play of the season. They went winless in three straight games and were outscored a combined 17-6 in a lopsided loss to the Panthers and two setbacks to the Rangers.

Adding to the frustration, player returns depended not on whether they felt sick - they reported few to no symptoms - but by their daily test results.

On Dec. 29, the NHL shortened its mandatory isolation period from 10 days to five days, but exiting protocol still wasn't as easy as circling a date on the calendar.

Anyone in protocol can test daily starting the day after infection. Two negative lab-based PCR tests done 24 hours apart - provided the individuals are asymptomatic or their symptoms are resolved - would allow them to be cleared before the sixth day.

On the sixth day, they test daily to either produce one lab-based PCR test that is negative or has a cycle threshold (CT) value over 30, or have two negative rapid point-of-care tests collected more than two hours apart. Individuals also need to be cleared by the team physician.

The CT value is key because PCR tests can still find traces of the virus weeks and months after infection. CT value is a marker for how much, or little, viral genetic material can be detected; the higher the number the better. So even if there is some virus detected in a PCR test, if it's above a certain CT value, an individual is not considered infectious.

"I didn't have any symptoms," Cirelli said. "I felt pretty good throughout the week and I tested every day, just to get that number up and see where it's at."

Most Lightning players and coaches returned within the five-day mark. Goaltender Andrei Vasilevskiy returned after seven days in protocol, and assistant coach Zettler took eight days to test out.

"You're just anxious," Zettler said. "When you wake up in the morning, and you feel good, you feel normal, you feel like you could go work out, you feel like you could just go out and have a normal day and you can't because your test shows that you can't. It's obviously frustrating.

"And I had three or four days of that where I felt like, 'OK, I'm ready to go here,' and I just wasn't able to because I didn't test out."

The Lightning are a fully-vaccinated team, and many players received boosters when the team made them available earlier in the season. Now those who have returned from protocol don't have to test for the next 90 days.

Entering Saturday's game against the Bruins, 11 of the 12 players who went into protocol are back. Colton is the only one yet to be cleared. The return of key players like Nikita Kucherov, Brayden Point and Erik Cernak from injury have the Lightning feeling whole again, and they hope their COVID issues are mostly behind them.

"I'm not worried about testing anymore, so that's a good thing," said defenseman Mikhail Sergachev, who went through protocol. "It sucks that it's the second year in a row that we have to do the same things and postpone the games and not play the games and guys have to sit out even though everybody's been vaccinated three times already. ...

"I can't really judge what the NHL is thinking, but everybody's getting sick of it."Florida reported 397,114 coronavirus cases over the seven-day period from Dec. 31 to Jan. 6, an average of about 56,700 infections per day. That's a 33 percent increase in weekly infections from the previous report.

The seven-day average of omicron variant infections is more than double the 25,000 daily average the delta wave hit this past summer. Florida's first omicron case was detected on Dec. 6, when daily cases were less than 2,000 infections per day on average.

The latest tally brings the total number of the state's COVID-19 cases up to 4,562,954 since the pandemic's first two cases in Florida were reported 22 months ago on March 1, 2020.

The state added 184 deaths since the previous report. This brings the total statewide number of pandemic deaths to 62,688.

Most of these occurred more than a week ago and were recorded by the state in the past seven days. It can take officials two weeks or more to confirm COVID-related deaths, and the holidays may delay reporting.

The Florida Department of Health announced in June that it would no longer release daily COVID-19 data. Instead, it now releases one report every Friday - but it continues to withhold information that previously was publicly available.

As of June 4, the state no longer reports non-resident vaccinations, coronavirus cases and fatalities. The state has repeatedly declined requests to provide non-resident data to the Tampa Bay Times.

Despite repeated requests from the Times, the state does not report the number of cases, hospitalizations and deaths by vaccination status.

VACCINATIONS: Florida administered 125,196 doses of vaccine in the past week, including 79,151 first-time vaccinations. Over 5.8 million Floridians ages 5 and up remain unvaccinated.

Vaccinations for children ages 5-11 numbered 18,465 in the past week. That's less than half the weekly pediatric vaccinations in the first full week it was available. In all, 16 percent of children in the 5-11 age group have had at least one vaccine shot.

As of Thursday, 72 percent of Florida residents ages 5 and up have received at least one dose of the coronavirus vaccine, according to the state.

Still, 32 percent of Florida's total population remains unvaccinated, including children 4 and under, who are not yet eligible to receive the vaccine. That is the next age group that may obtain approval in the coming weeks.

Vaccination rates are highest among Florida's older adults. About 91 percent of those age 65 and up have been vaccinated, and 89 percent of those ages 60-64 are vaccinated.

Children and young adults remain the least-vaccinated age groups. In Florida, ages 5 to 11 are 16 percent vaccinated, 12 to 19 are at 59 percent , ages 20 to 29 are at 60 percent and ages 30 to 39 are 70 percent vaccinated.

In Manatee and Pinellas counties, 68 percent of eligible residents 5 and up have been vaccinated; that number is 67 percent in Hillsborough; in Pasco, 66 percent; in Polk, 64 percent; and 60 percent in Citrus and Hernando.

BOOSTER SHOTS: Florida administered 169,722 booster doses, down more than 27,000 shots from the prior week. Booster shots are available to all those age 12 and up who received either their first dose of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine two months ago or their second dose of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines at least five months ago.

POSITIVITY:Florida's positivity rate increased to 31.2 percent in the past week, up from 26.5 percent the week before. Positivity rates were highest among young adults, with those age 20-29 testing positive 35.8 percent of the time. Positivity was at 34.8 percent for those age 30-39 and 34.1 percent for those age 40-49.

According to the World Health Organization, states should maintain a positivity rate of 5 percent or less for at least two weeks before fully reopening. A positivity rate of 5 percent or less indicates testing is widespread enough to capture mild, asymptomatic and negative cases.

Positivity rates around the Tampa Bay area were 33.8 percent in Polk, 30.8 percent in Hillsborough, 28.4 percent in Pasco, 25.8 percent in Manatee, 25.6 percent in Pinellas, 25.3 percent in Hernando, and 18 percent in Citrus.

HOSPITALIZATIONS: Florida had 8,548confirmed COVID-19 patients in hospitals as of Friday, according to the Department of Health and Human Services.

The Tampa Bay area saw 1,906 COVID-19-related hospital admissions from Dec. 28 to Jan. 5, the latest data available, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That's nearly four times the number from the week before. Hillsborough County hospitals had 783 admissions, Pinellas had 458; Pasco, 156; Manatee, 56; Polk, 355; Hernando, 79; and Citrus, 19.

LOCAL NUMBERS: Tampa Bay added 59,265 cases in the past week, bringing the area total up to 820,306 cases.

As of Thursday's count, Hillsborough added 22,135 new cases; Polk had 12,535; Pinellas had 11,232; Pasco had 6,238; Manatee had 4,567; Hernando had 1,606; and Citrus had 952.

The CDC reported that the Tampa Bay area counted 15 deaths from Dec. 28 to Jan. 5: Pasco saw 5 deaths; Polk saw 3; Pinellas and Manatee had 2; and Citrus, Hernando and Hillsborough each had 1.

 A slew of nations moved to stop air travel from southern Africa on Friday, and stocks plunged in Asia and Europe in reaction to news of a new, potentially more transmissible COVID-19 variant.

"The last thing we need is to bring in a new variant that will cause even more problems," said German Health Minister Jens Spahn, amid a massive spike in cases in the 27-nation European Union, which is recommending a ban on flights from southern African nations.

Within a few days of the discovery of the new variant, it has already impacted a jittery world that is sensitive to bad COVID-19 news, with deaths around the globe standing at well over 5 million.

Medical experts, including the World Health Organization, warned against any overreaction before all elements were clear but nations who acted said their concerns were justified.

"Early indications show this variant may be more transmissible than the delta variant and current vaccines may be less effective against it," British Health Secretary Sajid Javid told lawmakers. "We must move quickly and at the earliest possible moment," he said.

Belgium became the first European Union country to announce a case of the variant.

"We have one case of this variant that is confirmed. It's someone who came from abroad," said Health Minister Frank Vandenbroucke. "It's a suspicious variant. We don't know if it's a very dangerous variant."

Israel, one of the world's most vaccinated countries, announced Friday that it has also detected the country's first case of the new variant, in a traveler who returned from Malawi. The traveler and two other suspected cases have been placed in isolation. It said all three are vaccinated but that it is currently looking into their exact vaccination status.

The new variant immediately infected stock markets around the world. Major indexes fell in Europe and Asia and Dow Jones futures dipped 800 points ahead of the market opening in the U.S.

"Investors are likely to shoot first and ask questions later until more is known," said Jeffrey Halley of foreign exchange broker Oanda.

Oil prices plunged, with US. crude off 6.7 percent at $73.22 per barrel and the international Brent benchmark off 5.6 percent at $77.64, both unusually large moves for a single day. The pandemic caused oil prices to plunge during the initial outbreak of the pandemic in 2020 because travel restrictions reduced demand for fuel.

Airlines shares were hammered, with Lufthansa off 12.4 percent, IAG, parent of British Airways and Iberia, off 14.4 percent, Air France-KLM down 8.9 percent and easyJet falling 10.9 percent.

The WHO cautioned not to jump to conclusions too fast.

Speaking before the EU announcement, Dr. Michael Ryan, the head of emergencies at the WHO said that "it's really important that there are no knee-jerk responses."

"We've seen in the past, the minute there's any kind of mention of any kind of variation and everyone is closing borders and restricting travel. It's really important that we remain open, and stay focused," Ryan said.

The Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention agreed and it "strongly discourages the imposition of travel ban for people originating from countries that have reported this variant," it said in a statement. It added that "over the duration of this pandemic, we have observed that imposing bans on travelers from countries where a new variant is reported has not yielded a meaningful outcome."

Those urgings quickly fell on deaf ears.

The U.K. announced that it was banning flights from South Africa and five other southern African countries effective at noon on Friday, and that anyone who had recently arrived from those countries would be asked to take a coronavirus test.

Germany said its flight ban could be enacted as soon as Friday night. Spahn said airlines coming back from South Africa will only be able to transport German citizens home, and travelers will need to go into quarantine for 14 days whether they are vaccinated or not.

Germany has seen new record daily case numbers in recent days and passed the mark of 100,000 deaths from COVID-19 on Thursday.

Italy's health ministry also announced measures to ban entry into Italy of anyone who has been in seven southern African nations - South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia and Eswatini - in the past 14 days due to the new variant. The Netherlands and the Czech Republic are planning similar measures.

The Japanese government announced that from Friday, Japanese nationals traveling from Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana, South Africa and Lesotho will have to quarantine at government-dedicated accommodation for 10 days and do a COVID test on Day 3, Day 6 and Day 10. Japan has not yet opened up to foreign nationals.

The actions had a quick effect in the world of sports. A batch of British and Irish golfers withdrew from the Joburg Open before Friday's second round after the U.K. government announced it was banning flights from South Africa.

The South African government said in a statement that the "U.K.'s decision to temporarily ban South Africans from entering the U.K. seems to have been rushed as even the World Health Organization is yet to advise on the next steps."

The coronavirus evolves as it spreads and many new variants, including those with worrying mutations, often just die out. Scientists monitor for possible changes that could be more transmissible or deadly, but sorting out whether new variants will have a public health impact can take time.

Currently identified as B.1.1.529, the new variant has also been found in Botswana and Hong Kong in travelers from South Africa, he said.

The WHO's technical working group is to meet Friday to assess the new variant and may decide whether to give it a name from the Greek alphabet. It says coronavirus infections jumped 11 percent in Europe in the past week, the only region in the world where COVID-19 continues to rise. The WHO's Europe director, Dr. Hans Kluge, warned that without urgent measures, the continent could see another 700,000 deaths by the spring.President Joe Biden got it right: The new coronavirus variant omicron is "a cause for concern, not a cause for panic." The travel restrictions the U.S. and 70 other nations imposed will buy scientists time to further understand what risks omicron poses at this extended stage of the pandemic. For now, it's time to double down on what already works: Vaccinations, booster shots and wearing masks in crowded indoor settings.

Biden set the right tone at the White House on Monday, dismissing the need for widespread lockdowns and urging a defensive posture instead. The World Health Organization said South Africa first reported omicron on Nov. 24, and much about the variant is unknown. As of Tuesday, it had been detected in at least 19 countries, though not in the U.S. While its arrival here is inevitable, the travel bans and cooperative efforts at the international level will help to isolate any outbreak. That's why it's essential to use the coming weeks to expand vaccinations, increase the number of boosters and to take sensible health precautions in public. It's understandable that Americans have COVID-19 fatigue. But these measures will all help slow the virus' spread, which is a first, essential step for returning to a sense of normalcy.

The administration was wise for taking a measured approach. While scientists are concerned that omicron could be more contagious than other variants, and the vaccines' effectiveness against it is unknown, those answers are not expected for weeks, and there's no immediate basis for locking down society or the economy. Many public health experts are confident that existing vaccines are up for the fight, and manufacturers have promised in a worst-case scenario that they could quickly produce a boutique vaccine. What's more, there's no shortage of vaccines available to eligible Americans, and no delays in the pipeline for administering shots. This is a moment for suiting up, not shutting down, and for reprising the sensible precautions we're familiar with now that the busy holiday season is here.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention underscored this messaging campaign by strengthening its recommendation for boosters to include all American adults. Though it previously approved boosters for all adults, the agency had urged them primarily for those 50 years and older. While 70 percent of the U.S. population has received at least one dose of vaccine, only 21 percent of those fully vaccinated had received a booster as of Tuesday.

The discovery in South Africa is another reminder that a global pandemic knows no borders. With vaccination rates across much of Africa still in the single digits, richer nations have a responsibility and a self-interest in making the vaccines more widely available. The U.S. has pledged to donate more than 1 billion doses for global use, and has donated 275 million doses so far. But these nations also need logistical help to store and administer the vaccines, and outreach efforts to overcome vaccine skeptics and those in hard-to-reach areas.

Federal health officials said Tuesday they were expanding a surveillance program at some large, U.S. airports as part of an effort to detect what could be the first cases of omicron in the country. The government is doing its homework, and its resistance to overreact should build public confidence in any new steps ahead. But the most effective tools at our disposal are already here, free and readily available. Getting the vaccine and booster, wearing a mask in public and taking other sensible precautions are the surest way to a safer holiday season and a much brighter 2022.Florida lawmakers will convene Monday for a special legislative session, and the big question is: Why? With Florida's COVID-19 numbers moving in the right direction, with vaccines becoming more available and with society returning to a fuller sense of normal, now is the time to seal the deal - not to jeopardize progress against the pandemic by incentivizing anti-vaxxers and creating chaos for businesses.

Gov. Ron DeSantis called the special session in October, and he has occupied himself for weeks railing against vaccine mandates and threatening to strike against both employers and the Biden administration for what he characterizes as an assault on freedom. Last week, he called the slate of vaccine-related bills "probably the strongest protections for both private and public sector employees anywhere in the country," but they are nothing of the sort. The legislation only inspires irresponsible Floridians to continue endangering public health by refusing to get vaccinated.

What's most telling is that the governor caved in the face of the pushback he's received from the state's largest employers. Last month, DeSantis said he wanted businesses to be held liable for any medical harm arising from a mandatory vaccination. He also wanted to open up employers to COVID-related lawsuits if they required employees be vaccinated. Neither of those ideas are contained in the bills released last week.

The moves allow the governor to make it seem like he is playing tough with employers and with a Democratic president, while including enough weasel language not to make a realstand.

The legislative proposals, though, come with some real-world flaws. They bar school districts from imposing mask mandates or requiring quarantines in some cases for students exposed to COVID-19 despite whatever's happening in their communities. And they create a new enforcement mechanism and inducements for parents to challenge these school safety protocols in court.

This rhetorical defense of freedom sets up the potential for mixed messaging andanother legal showdown over whether the state or federal government has jurisdiction of employee health and safety. If passed, the measures could make Florida law conflict with both federal statute and new COVID rules imposed by the Biden administration that require businesses with 100 or more employees to mandate that their workers be vaccinated.

At the very least, the legislation would create confusion, red tape and new costs for businesses that have put vaccination requirements in place. Employers would have to offer several vaccine opt-outs to employees, including accommodating "periodic testing" at "no cost to the employee." Companies that don't comply could face thousands of dollars in fines.This will only embolden anti-vaxxers to continue holding out. And it creates an uncertain environment for litigation just as companies are struggling to recover.

Is anything driving this exercise beyond political opportunism? Infections, hospitalizations and deaths in Florida are trending downward. Fewer tests are coming back positive. The federal government has authorized booster shots for older adults, and earlier this month, the Food and Drug Administrationauthorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for those ages 5 through 11 years, clearing the way to inoculate 28 million children in this age group. Employers have done their part by mandating vaccines, a move that's helped enormously to make workplaces and society safer. In Florida, despite the governor's harassment, school districts in many large, urban metros helped contain the outbreak at the beginning of the fall semester with mask mandates, and most eased those rules as the situation warranted. So what is the governor trying to accomplish, and why the urgency of a special session, when the Legislature will already meet in January?

Simple: DeSantis is playing beat-the-clock, seizing a narrow window to further politicize a health crisis that by many accounts is on the wane. This may be the most cynical ploy in his mismanagement of the pandemic yet. Legislators should not display the same bad judgment to indulge him.Britain granted conditional authorization on Thursday to the first pill shown to successfully treat COVID-19 so far. It also is the first country to OK the treatment from drugmaker Merck, although it wasn't immediately clear how quickly the pill would be available.

The pill was licensed for adults 18 and older who have tested positive for COVID-19 and have at least one risk factor for developing severe disease, such as obesity or heart disease. Patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 would take four pills of the drug, known molnupiravir, twice a day for five days.

An antiviral pill that reduces symptoms and speeds recovery could prove groundbreaking, easing caseloads on hospitals and helping to curb outbreaks in poorer countries with fragile health systems. It would also bolster the two-pronged approach to the pandemic: treatment, by way of medication, and prevention, primarily through vaccinations.

Molnupiravir is also pending review with regulators in the U.S., the European Union and elsewhere. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration announced last month it would convene a panel of independent experts to scrutinize the pill's safety and effectiveness in late November.

Initial supplies will be limited. Merck has said it can produce 10 million treatment courses through the end of the year, but much of that supply has already been purchased by governments worldwide.

In October, U.K. officials announced they secured 480,000 courses of molnupiravir and expected thousands of vulnerable Britons to have access to the treatment this winter via a national study.

"Today is a historic day for our country, as the U.K. is now the first country in the world to approve an antiviral that can be taken at home for COVID-19," British health secretary Sajid Javid said.

"We are working at pace across the government and with the NHS to set out plans to deploy molnupiravir to patients through a national study as soon as possible," he said in a statement, referring to the U.K.'s National Health Service. Doctors said the treatment would be particularly significant for people who don't respond well to vaccination.

Merck and partner Ridgeback Biotherapeutic have requested clearance for the drug with regulators around the world for adults with early cases of COVID-19 who are at risk for severe disease or hospitalization. That's roughly the same group targeted for treatment with infused COVID-19 antibody drugs, the standard of care in many countries for patients who don't yet require hospitalization.

Merck announced preliminary results in September showing its drug cut hospitalizations and deaths by half among patients with early COVID-19 symptoms. The results haven't yet been peer reviewed or published in a scientific journal.

The company also didn't disclose details on molnupiravir's side effects, except to say that rates of those problems were similar between people who got the drug and those who received dummy pills.

The drug targets an enzyme the coronavirus uses to reproduce itself, inserting errors into its genetic code that slow its ability to spread and take over human cells. That genetic activity has led some independent experts to question whether the drug could potentially cause mutations leading to birth defects or tumors.

Britain's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency said molnupiravir's ability to interact with DNA and cause mutations had been studied "extensively" and that it wasn't found to pose a risk to humans.

"Studies in rats showed that (molnupiravir) may cause harmful effects to the unborn offspring, although this was at doses which were higher than those that will be given to humans, and these effects were not observed in other animals," the agency said in an email.

In company trials, both men and women were instructed to either use contraception or abstain from sex. Pregnant women were excluded from the study. Merck has stated that the drug is safe when used as directed.

Molnupiravir was initially studied as a potential flu therapy with funding from the U.S. government. Last year, researchers at Emory University decided to repurpose the drug as a potential COVID-19 treatment. They then licensed the drug to Ridgeback and partner Merck.

Last week, Merck agreed to allow other drugmakers to make its COVID-19 pill, in a move aimed at helping millions of people in poorer countries get access. The Medicines Patent Pool, a U.N.-backed group, said Merck will not receive royalties under the agreement for as long as the World Health Organization deems COVID-19 to be a global emergency.

But the deal was criticized by some activists for excluding many middle-income countries capable of making millions of treatments, including Brazil and China.

Still, experts commended Merck for agreeing to widely share its formula and promising to help any companies who need technological help in making their drug - something no coronavirus vaccine producers have agreed to.

"Unlike the grotesquely unequal distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, the poorest countries will not have to wait at the back of the queue for molnupiravir," said Dr. Mohga Kamal-Yanni, a senior health adviser to the People's Vaccine Alliance. Fewer than 1% of the world's COVID-19 vaccines have gone to poor countries and experts hope easier-to-dispense treatments will help them curb the pandemic.

Merck previously announced licensing deals with several Indian makers of generic drugs to manufacture lower-cost versions of molnupiravir for developing countries.

The U.S. has agreed to pay roughly $700 per course of the drug for about 1.7 million treatments. Merck says it plans to use a tiered pricing strategy for developing countries. A review by Harvard University and King's College London estimated the drug costs about $18 to make each 40-pill course of treatment.

While other treatments have been cleared to treat COVID-19, including steroids and monoclonal antibodies, those are administered by injection or infusion and are mostly used in hospitals and other health care facilities.Hillsborough Commissioner Stacy White says it's time for the county government to unmask.

White, at the conclusion of a commission meeting Wednesday, urged County Administrator Bonnie Wise to roll back safety protocols put in place during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Specifically, White said it was unfair to require unvaccinated county employees to show proof of a recent negative test for the coronavirus. He also said it was time to ditch the mandate to wear masks inside the county buildings.

"I'm ready to put a lot of these things in the rearview mirror including the mask use here in the Board of County Commissioners chambers. I think it's long past due," White said.

Some employees, he said, have groused about having to burn paid time off if they are unable to work because they don't have a recent test result.

"I think it's wrong that we're continuing to require our employees to submit to this testing. And to face ramifications if they don't submit," White said.

But White also acknowledged the authority to make that decision rested with Wise, and not with the commission. His pitch drew little public support from other board members.

"I understand people are tired of all this, but when you're doing something that's working, in actually reducing the incidents in the number of people who are becoming ill, ... I think we're not done with this," said Commissioner Kimberly Overman. "I think sending the message that we should stop doing what's working is a dangerous precedent."

The timing of White's proposal also drew notice. He made it the same morning as the funeral service for Hillsborough County firefighter Giovanni Ciancio, 55, who died from COVID-19 complications on Oct. 21.

Commission Chairwoman Pat Kemp called the county's safety rules "a carefulness demonstrated by this board that was well exercised."

Since Oct. 18, Hillsborough County has required county employees to be vaccinated against the coronavirus or show proof of a recent negative diagnostic test. It offered $500 and two extra days off as incentives for employees to receive the vaccine.

Currently, 3,728 county employees, or 72.2 percent of the workforce, are vaccinated.

The county also requires masks be worn inside county buildings. Members of the public who wish to address the commission in person during its meetings must leave the chambers immediately after speaking.

For the week ending Oct. 30, the county's seven-day weekly rate of positive test results was less than 4 percent, according to the state Health Department. Through Oct. 24, 58 percent of the county residents, or 875,000 people, had received at least one dose of the COVID-19 vaccine.

Wise said her decisions are based on input from the county's human resources, risk management, legal and other departments that includes data on the number of COVID-19 cases in the community and among county employees, vaccination rates and other information.

"We are not going to be masking forever," Wise said. "We all want to get rid of this. We all want to be safe and we are getting to the point where we can make some new decisions and we are thoughtfully going through that."

It isn't just people who are unvaccinated using Florida's 25 monoclonal antibody treatment clinics, according to Florida officials.

About 45 percent of the more than 135,000 people who have received the COVID-19 treatment were fully vaccinated, state officials estimate. In parts of the state with higher vaccination rates, such as Miami-Dade County, the percentage has been as much as 60 percent.

But do vaccinated people with breakthrough cases and mild symptoms need to get monoclonal antibody treatment? The question of who should be prioritized is drawing debate in the medical community. The pricey drug cocktail is free to patients but costs taxpayers about $2,100 per dose.

Patients should talk with their doctor, but people who are fully vaccinated and otherwise healthy do not benefit much from getting the treatment if they develop a breakthrough case of COVID-19, said Michael Teng, a virologist at the University of South Florida.

Although people can still get sick, the COVID-19 vaccines have been highly effective in protecting against serious disease and hospitalization, he said.

"The monoclonal antibodies are not going to add too much to that protection," Teng said. "If you are in a really high-risk group and it's been a while since you have had your second dose of vaccine, that may be something to talk with your physician about, but generally speaking, it is not really going to do that much for normal, healthy people."

The treatment is lifesaving for at-risk people who aren't vaccinated, reducing the chance of hospitalization by as much as 70 percent, Teng said. People who are vaccinated but have conditions affecting their immune system, such as being in cancer treatment, also benefit immensely, he said.

Dr. Michael Cacciatore, chief medical officer of AdventHealth Medical Group, said he recommends everyone who is eligible get the treatment, regardless of their vaccination status. Thousands of patients have received the treatment through the hospital system without a single major allergic reaction, he said.

"If you have COVID and you've got symptoms, even if mild and you have significant other comorbidities, I would really think hard about getting that antibody infusion," Cacciatore said.

Under the drug's emergency authorization, people 12 and older who are at high risk of severe disease are eligible to receive the treatment if they have been infected with or exposed to COVID-19. Risk factors include being 65 years or older, cancer, chronic kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, heart conditions and pregnancy. People who are overweight also qualify.

Patients who want the treatment shouldn't wait to see if their symptoms worsen. The cocktail is most effective when given early in an infection. It also isn't as simple as taking a pill. It requires either an IV infusion or four shots given in rapid succession.

Monoclonal antibodies are laboratory-made proteins that mimic the immune system's ability to fight off viruses.

The state's clinics have primarily been giving Regeneron's antibody cocktail, which the federal government purchased in bulk and is providing at no cost to patients. The first state clinic opened on Aug. 12 in Jacksonville.

Gov. Ron DeSantis voiced concerns about supply caps put in place by President Joe Biden's administration as the delta variant sent demand skyrocketing. With cases now falling, the supply reduction did not lead to a shortage in Florida, state officials said.

Clinics have enough doses to meet demand, and state officials are keeping the clinics open to everyone who is eligible, Christina Pushaw, a DeSantis spokesperson, said in an email.

"Of the many vaccinated patients who have come to Florida's mAb sites for treatment, all have attested to having one or more comorbidities that put them at higher risk of complications from COVID-19. Many are seniors, immunocompromised, and/or overweight," she said.

The Florida Department of Health has not released detailed data on the monoclonal antibody treatment program.

Because of a standing order from the state surgeon general, Floridians do not need a doctor's prescription to get the treatment. The clinics operate mostly on the honor system because state officials "did not want to create barriers to access that might deter any patients in need from getting this lifesaving treatment," Pushaw said.

State officials stress the numbers don't mean the vaccines aren't working. For instance, unvaccinated people make up about 10 percent of Miami-Dade's population but 40 percent of the patients at the Miami treatment site.

During the peak of the delta surge, hospital officials stressed more than 90 percent of their COVID-19 patients were unvaccinated. It's rare that someone who is fully vaccinated dies of COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recorded 6,617 breakthrough COVID-19 deaths.

If antibody treatment is in short supply, the National Institutes of Health recommends it be given first to unvaccinated and partially vaccinated people along with people who have been fully vaccinated but are not expected to mount an adequate immune response, including people who are 65 years and older.

Because of supply concerns, Tennessee limited the drug to people most at risk of dying, prioritizing unvaccinated people over some vaccinated people who are not immunocompromised.

- By The Orlando Sentinel

The antibody cocktail is safe, but like any medication or medical procedure, it isn't risk-free, Teng said. It's extremely rare, but the infusion can cause a life-threatening allergic reaction. Other reported side effects include fever, chills, nausea, diarrhea, muscle aches and headache.

"This is an injection," Teng said. "This is not something that is comfortable. You are either getting a large dose of liquid under the skin or sitting for an IV to get infused. It's not like taking an Aspirin, and things go away. It's a procedure."

Patients could soon have another option that won't require an injection of IV infusion. The Food and Drug Administration is reviewing an anti-COVID pill manufactured by the drug maker Merck.Enrolling in the right Medicare program is one of the most important things Florida seniors can do to protect their health. But there's something else they can do that's even more important:

Get vaccinated.

The COVID-19 pandemic remains a threat to the state's elder citizens. Although 88 percent of Floridians 65 and up are vaccinated - that's more than 4 million people - about 500,000 remain unvaccinated.

Thousands of seniors still are getting infected every week, and those 65 and older who get infected are far likelier to face hospitalization and death than are younger age groups, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Even though it's 19 months into the pandemic, seniors still might have plenty of questions about staying safe: Should they get a booster shot? What about a flu shot? Is it safe to see the grandkids? Here are some answers.

Some vaccinated people can get COVID-19. Should I still get vaccinated?

Absolutely, according to medical experts and a groundswell of research.

Some vaccinated individuals still can contract COVID-19, a phenomenon known as a "breakthrough infection." These were expected, and have been from the start.

"The goal of the vaccine is not to prevent you from getting COVID," said Dr. John Sinnott, chair of the University of South Florida Department of Internal Medicine and an infectious disease specialist at Tampa General Hospital. "It's to prevent you from getting severe COVID."

Breakthrough infections aren't proof the vaccines are failing. In fact, all evidence points to the contrary.

Vaccines are highly effective at preventing severe illness - meaning hospitalization or death - from COVID-19. Florida is not releasing the number of breakthrough infections in the state, but overall just a few thousand out of more than 185 million people who have been vaccinated have died from a breakthrough infection in the U.S., according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data.

The shots equip the body to fight the virus - which is particularly important for older adults, who are at greater risk of severe illness and death from an infection.

"Ninety-five percent of the COVID patients we admit are not vaccinated," said Sinnott. "We have had 24-year-olds who are not vaccinated die of COVID. On the other hand, we have 80-year-old people who have been vaccinated walk out of the hospital recovered."

I'm vaccinated. Should I get a booster shot?

The evidence suggests that the answer, once again, is yes.

The Food and Drug Administration and the CDC now recommend people who are 65 or older, or over 50 with underlying medical conditions who got the Pfizer vaccine should get a Pfizer booster shot.

"People over 65 or who are immunosuppressed should absolutely get a booster," Sinnott said. "You reduce your chance of breakthrough infection by tenfold, and you reduce your chance of death elevenfold. It is remarkable."

The government still is studying whether users of the Moderna and Johnson & Johnson vaccines will need boosters.

Emerging data shows vaccine protection may diminish over time, an event known as "waning immunity." Vaccines trigger the body to produce antibodies, which are like specialized soldiers that respond to a specific invader in the body. The proteins are similar to SWAT teams, Sinnott said.

"When you get your first two shots, the immune system has plenty of SWAT teams ready to be deployed," he said. "But when you don't use the SWAT teams, people get reassigned. So your immunity declines by about 3 percent a month, maybe a little more in the elderly."

Booster shots may increase the immune system's response to a COVID-19 infection, according to early data from research conducted in Israel.

That the protection offered by vaccines can decline and level off over time - usually over the course of several months following vaccination - is a phenomenon that's normal and expected.

It's one reason why Americans are encouraged to get a flu shot each fall, rather than a single vaccine early on in life.

Speaking of flu shots, should I get one?

Last year, pandemic precautions such as mask-wearing, social distancing and hand-washing helped tamp down on spread of the flu. But those precautions are largely gone now. And historically, a mild flu season - like the one the U.S. experienced last year - is almost always followed by a bad one, according to Sinnott.

Getting a flu shot is Important to prevent what's called a "twindemic" - when two viruses spread through the community at the same time.

"Last year, we had a few patients who had both the flu and COVID," Sinnott said. "It did not go well. They either died or had an extended hospital stay."

People who are 65 and older are at heightened risk for severe illness from both diseases - so doctors are strongly recommending older adults get their influenza shots this fall.

Many health care providers in Tampa Bay are offering COVID-19 booster shots and flu shots during the same visit - making it easier to streamline the process of protecting your health.

Should I keep wearing a mask? What about social distancing?

As long as cases remain high in the U.S., people of all ages should continue to wear masks when indoors with anyone outside their immediate household, including inside grocery stores or another family member's home.

COVID-19 fatigue - including engaging in behaviors like wearing masks indoors and social distancing - is real. But this isn't forever, experts say. The long-term payoff of more years with loved ones will be worth it.

"If we can just hold on a little bit longer, with that perspective in mind, looking back, this will just be a small part of our lives," said Dr. Kathy Black, a professor at the University of South Florida School of Aging Studies who researches healthy aging. "We can all do something for a year or two."

Remember, mask-wearing and hand-washing can protect seniors from both the COVID and flu viruses.

Can I still see my unvaccinated grandkids? What about unvaccinated adults?

Health isn't merely the absence of illness or infirmity, according to Black. It's important to focus on your mental and social health, while still taking your physical well-being into account.

"Isolation is as big a predictor of mortality as smoking 15 cigarettes a day," she said. "So it's important for all of us to stay connected."

Older adults should continue to mask up around unvaccinated family members or friends whenever they're indoors, experts say. That includes children 11 and under, who are not yet eligible to be vaccinated.

Those who feel unsafe connecting in person can turn to social technologies like Zoom, FaceTime and Uniper to connect with loved ones from afar.

Area aging agencies often offer help setting up these platforms - check the bottom of the article to find contact information for the agency in your county.

I live in a long-term care facility - there are staff members, fellow residents or visiting family members who are unvaccinated. How can I stay safe?

Long-term care residents - whether vaccinated or unvaccinated - still should wear a mask at all times when they're around others, Sinnott said. This includes staff members or roommates.

"I still wear a mask 12 hours a day," said Sinnott, who is 73. "This very dangerous virus, and we're still in a pandemic. People should do their best to avoid it. I have a number of patients who never wore a mask and got sick."

Residents can remove their masks when alone in their rooms, according to Sinnott.

It's not forever, he reiterated - but it depends on enough people getting vaccinated.

"As you look at the ebb and flow of infectious disease, you'll find that this just an epidemic of the unvaccinated," Sinnott said. "We're coming off the peak of the delta (surge), but I just have a suspicion that the delta will come back again. But we're extremely fortunate in America that we have the vaccine."She spent her years in and out of rehab, her father said, struggling to hold down a job for a decade, but by spring of 2020, she had been sober for several months.

Then, the pandemic hit.

The medical treatment place where 40-year-old Lori Holzman went for help with her substance abuse issues shut down, and support meetings stopped. In April 2020, Holzman overdosed on fentanyl and Xanax.

"I think that she needed those meetings," said her 67-year-old father, Stephen J. Holzman of Delray Beach. "Indirectly, COVID killed her."

State lawmakers are returning to Tallahassee to prepare for the 2022 legislative session at an inflection point of the opioid crisis. Flush with federal cash from lawsuits and pandemic relief aid, elected officials will be forced to find solutions to a long-simmering public health disaster that boiled over during the coronavirus pandemic.

Drug rehabilitation facilities are facing a rush of patients, treatment providers say.

"The surge we thought was going to come, it's here now. They are inundated now," said Linda McKinnon, president and CEO of Central Florida Behavioral Health Network. "People are sicker. The drug addiction is worse."

More people are dead, too. According to preliminary data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, American overdose deaths increased 30 percent between February 2020 and February 2021. Florida saw a 34 percent spike: some 7,700 people lost their lives to an overdose in that time.

Experts say the increase can be attributed to two major factors. Access to drug treatment plummeted as the pandemic forced providers to drastically change the way they operated. The Department of Children and Families reported 63,357 admissions to drug treatment facilities in 2020 - a 28 percent decline from 2019. Opioid-specific drug treatment admissions fell 21 percent.

At the same time, a statewide crackdown on doctors and pharmacies that operated as pill mills in the early 2010s has pushed the drug market back onto the street. As customers seek cheaper, better highs, dealers are selling greater quantities of fentanyl, an extremely potent synthetic opioid that's often manufactured abroad. That drug factored in thousands of Florida deaths in 2020.

"The game-changer in the last couple of years is fentanyl. And the reason it's a game-changer is people don't know how to use it," said Pinellas County Sheriff Bob Gualtieri. Later, he added, "We're trying to choke off the supply, but we will never choke it off."

Funding a solution

In 2021, Florida spent hundreds of millions on community mental health and substance abuse treatment. Much of that money came from federally supplemented programs like Medicaid, and federal pandemic aid. Over the next decade, more than $1.5 billion is set to come to the state from various multi-state lawsuits against opioid manufacturers like the Sackler family-owned Purdue Pharma, and against distributors like AmerisourceBergen, Cardinal and McKesson. Attorney General Ashley Moody, who helped negotiate those settlements, has said the state will use that money to bolster its drug treatment efforts.

Expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act would bring hundreds of millions of federal dollars to Florida every year that the state's uninsured could use to get treated. But expansion has been a Republican nonstarter in Tallahassee since it became an option in 2014.

Dianne Clarke, CEO of Operation PAR, Inc., said the funding system for drug treatment is stressed. Clarke runs an organization of substance abuse prevention and mental health and treatment centers in seven counties along the west coast of Florida.

Florida routinely ranks toward the bottom of the 50 states in per capita spending on behavioral health, Clarke noted. The reluctance to expand Medicaid has a lot to do with that. According to the nonprofit organization Mental Health America, Florida ranked 48th out of the 50 states and Washington, D.C., in access to mental health care.

Even the substantial funding levels of 2021 haven't gone far enough to address the demand for treatment, McKinnon said. Hiring additional staff is a challenge for treatment centers because of the current labor shortage, she noted. On a fundamental level, it's difficult to make long-term plans without recurring dollars, she said.

"There's a lot of money that, because of the way it's come down, we're not able to really use it effectively. So that's an issue," McKinnon said.

Legislative fits and starts

A spokesperson for Senate President Wilton Simpson, R-Trilby, said lawmakers will devote time during this fall's legislative committee hearings to checking in on how substance abuse and mental health money is being spent. The Legislature is also working to implement strategies that are more practical than they are expensive.

Sen. Jim Boyd, R-Bradenton, was a member of the Florida Statewide Task Force on Opioid Abuse. That body, chaired by Moody, published a report in April 2020 that spelled out a number of recommendations for state policymakers. Among them: encourage the expanded use of opioid antagonist drugs like Narcan, which have been known to reverse the symptoms of an overdose.

As a member of the House and Senate, Boyd has sponsored proposals to stiffen the criminal penalties for fentanyl dealers, and to tighten regulations on the prescribing of opioids. Those measures each became law before the most recent spike in deaths.

But in 2021, Boyd introduced a bill that would have expanded the prescribing of Narcan to anyone "who may come into contact with a controlled substance or a person who is at risk of experiencing an opioid overdose." The bill died in a committee. Boyd said he plans to refile a version for the 2022 session.

"Sadly, I think it's something that we're all going to have to work on not just this year, but in the years to come," Boyd said of the opioid crisis.

Other programs have shown promise locally. Jacksonville's Project Save Lives effort pairs hospitalized overdose patients with peer specialists. The idea of the program is to give an addict a support system, ensuring the patient doesn't slip through the cracks of Florida's often scattered addiction treatment scene. According to an August 2020 report, project participants showed a 28 percent decrease in repeated overdoses - even accounting for the first half of 2020, when overdose calls were spiking in the area.

A 2021 bill by Darryl Rouson, D-St. Petersburg, would have expanded the use of peer specialists by developing a structure for the state to license them. It passed the Senate unanimously, but it was never heard in the House.

Rouson has already refiled the bill, SB 282.

"In recovery, we have a saying: 'The therapeutic value of one addict helping another is without parallel,'" Rouson, a recovering addict, said in an interview.

Some state efforts are also making a difference. A 2021 proposal backed by House Speaker Chris Sprowls, R-Palm Harbor, extended Medicaid coverage for new mothers from up to 60 days to up to a year. That effort is likely to help keep vulnerable young women from succumbing to addiction, said Dr. William Sappenfield, a USF professor who has led the state's Maternal Opioid Recovery Effort. Sappenfield noted that overdoses are the leading cause of death for women during pregnancy or for up to a year after pregnancy.

But Sappenfield said that maternal health is just one part of the opioid epidemic. He likened the issue to a polluted river: "The problem is occurring upstream. I've got to deal with it downstream because it's having a huge impact on mothers and families. But we've got to solve the issues upstream."

Gualtieri, the Pinellas sheriff, said he's not asking the Legislature to take any drastic steps. As the state recovers from the pandemic, he said it would be best to act on the recommendations of another task force created by state lawmakers: The Commission on Mental Health and Substance Abuse.

"What's been needed is a very thorough review of mental health processes and systems," said Gualtieri.

The task force's first report is due Sept. 1, 2022.

Florida reports 12,880 coronavirus cases over the seven-day period from Oct. 22-28, an average of 1,840 infections per day. The data released Friday shows a 15 percent drop in cases from the week before and the lowest weekly infection rate since June.

The latest tally brings the total number of cases up to 3,647,277 since the pandemic's first two cases in Florida were reported 20 months ago on March 1, 2020.

The state added 867 deaths since the previous week's report. This brings the total statewide number of pandemic deaths to 59,670. Most of these deaths occurred more than one weeks ago, as it can take officials two weeks or more to confirm COVID-related deaths. The report indicates that 56 deaths occurred between Oct. 22-28, though that number likely will rise as more are confirmed.

The Florida Department of Health announced in June that it would no longer release daily COVID-19 data. Instead, it now releases a weekly report every Friday - but it continues to withhold information that previously was publicly available.

As of June 4, the state no longer reports non-resident vaccinations, coronavirus cases and fatalities. The state has declined repeated requests to provide non-resident data to the Tampa Bay Times.

Florida is the only state that updates its coronavirus caseloads and data just once per week. Although weekly reports can be more reliable than daily updates, experts warn that infrequent data updates may delay the identification of emerging trends.

Vaccinations:Florida administered 117,709 doses in the past week. About 56,000 doses went to first-time recipients. More than 5 million eligible Floridians remain unvaccinated.

As of Thursday, 73 percent of Florida residents age 12 and up have received at least one dose of the coronavirus vaccine, according to the state. Nearly 64 percent of eligible residents have been fully vaccinated.

But 37 percent of Florida's total population remain unvaccinated, including children 11 and under who are not yet eligible to receive the vaccine.

Vaccination rates are highest among Florida's older adults: 89 percent for Floridians 65 and older and 85 percent of those ages 60-64, according to state data.

Children and young adults remain the least-vaccinated age groups. Ages 12-19 are 56 percent vaccinated, ages 20-29 are 55 percent, and ages 30-39 are 64 percent.

In Hillsborough County, 68 percent of residents 12 and up have been vaccinated; in Pinellas, 68 percent; in Pasco, 67 percent; in Manatee, 68 percent; in Polk, 66 percent; in Hernando, 61 percent; and in Citrus, 60 percent.

Booster shots:Florida administered 222,759 booster doses, doubling the number administered the prior week. Booster shots are available to at-risk residents who received their second Pfizer dose at least six months ago. So far, 1,116,459 Florida residents have received a third dose of the Pfizer vaccine.

Positivity:Florida's positivity rate fell to 3.0 percent in the past week, down from 3.4 percent the prior week. Positivity rates were highest among ages 11 and under, with 3.8 percent of tests coming back positive.

Just over 430,000 residents were tested between Oct. 22-28. That's down more than 50 percent from a peak of 872,000 weekly tests the week of Aug. 20-26.

Before fully reopening, states should maintain a positivity rate of 5 percent or less for at least two weeks, according to the World Health Organization. A positivity rate of 5 percent or less indicates testing is widespread enough to capture mild, asymptomatic and negative cases.

Positivity fell around the Tampa Bay area, where the positivity rate was 3.5 percent in Hillsborough, 2.1 percent in Pinellas, 3.5 percent in Pasco, 3.3 percent in Manatee, 3.4 percent in Polk, 2.4 percent in Hernando and 3.4 percent in Citrus.

Hospitalizations:Florida had 1,837 confirmed COVID-19 patients in the hospital as of Friday, according to the Department of Health and Human Services, down 18 percent from last week.

The Tampa Bay area saw 655 hospital admissions from Oct. 18-24, the latest data available, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hillsborough County hospitals had 212 admissions, Pinellas had 207 admissions, Pasco had 53 admissions, Manatee had 29 admissions, Polk had 126 admissions, Hernando had 17 admissions and Citrus had 11 admissions.

Local numbers:Tampa Bay added 2,329 cases in the past week, bringing the area total up to 697,144 cases.

As of Thursday's count, Hillsborough added 887 new cases, Pinellas had 397, Pasco had 278, Manatee had 222, Polk had 413, Hernando had 63 and Citrus had 69.

The CDC reported that the Tampa Bay area had 235 deaths from Oct. 18-24: Hillsborough counted 30; Pinellas saw 42; Pasco had 28; Manatee had 35; Polk saw 51; Hernando had 24; and Citrus saw 25.Gov. Ron DeSantis wants to make it hard for employers to require their workers to get a COVID-19 vaccination. He's so serious about his version of ensuring "personal freedoms" that he has called for the Legislature to meet in a special session next month to create laws to punish businesses that enact vaccine mandates. Among other proposals, DeSantis wants those businesses to be financially liable for any medical harm that results from mandatory vaccinations.

Conservatives like DeSantis usually bend over backward to support business and free enterprise. They talk about setting a fair playing field and then allowing the market to take its course. They usually abhor the intrusive and heavy hand of big government. Now DeSantis doesn't seem to have any problem twisting businesses' arm.

A bout of cognitive dissonance is far less important than this central fact: Florida's record on controlling and containing COVID is abysmal. State lawmakers tasked with considering DeSantis' proposals must remember that nearly 59,000 Floridians have already died from COVID - that's more than the American death toll in Vietnam. It's easy to see a number like this and forget that it represents real people like Dennis Bello, 74, of Brandon; Janet Israel, 66, of Largo; Garlynn Boyd, 54, of St. Petersburg; Steven Thomas Carroll, 45, of Dade City; and Clearwater's 32-year-old Adam Hergenreder. They were Floridians with family and friends who loved them. By the time the special legislative session in Tallahassee rolls around, the number will be even higher.

Florida has the eighth-highest death rate among the states since the start of the pandemic, at 272 deaths for every 100,000 residents. That's worse than California. Worse than Ohio. Worse than Minnesota. Worse than Nebraska. More than twice the death rate of Colorado, four times the death rate of Hawaii.

And since early June, Florida has the highest death rate in the nation - period. An undoubtedly bleak way to think about that: No state failed as miserably as Florida this summer at keeping residents safe from COVID. The ignoble distinction is not solely the governor's fault, nor do our state lawmakers possess some magical power to make COVID disappear overnight.

But the death rates speak for themselves. As legislators contemplate the best course during the upcoming special session, they must not forget those numbers, those deaths, those real people. They must ask themselves: Should we make it harder for businesses to help control the virus? Or should we keep on doing more of what made us the worst in the nation?