Florida is closing in on almost 200 deaths from the coronavirus, with the state Department of Health reporting an additional 25 deaths on Saturday alone.

Those deaths came from areas around Broward, Dade, Monroe, and Palm Beach counties - far south of the Tampa Bay area, which reported no new deaths.

In all, Florida has seen 195 people succumb to COVID-19, the severe and sometimes fatal respiratory disease caused by the strand of coronavirus that has swept the globe. It's a staggering spike from the 56 deaths attributed to the virus just one week ago - accounting for a 248 percent increase.

After a week that saw Florida surpass 10,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, a resurgence of testing saw an additional 1,277 come back positive for the virus on Saturday, according to the state's Department of Health. That brings the state's total number of positive coronavirus cases to 11,545. The single day increase marked a 12.4 percent rise in cases and a 14.7 percent jump in deaths statewide.

The number of positive coronavirus patients continues to surge in the southern parts of the state, with Miami-Dade County leading the state with 3,890 positive cases and 243 hospitalizations. Yet an influx of much-needed testing equipment has also sparked a surge of positive cases identified in the Tampa Bay area. Hillsborough, Pasco, Pinellas, Hernando, Citrus and Manatee counties accounted for 1,132 cases as of Saturday.

While Florida's testing has increased over the past week, the percent of those testing positive for COVID-19 overall is 11 percent. Of the 11,725 tests performed on April 3, there were 1,597 positive results, or 14 percent.

The number of positive patients in Hillsborough County is now 497, the fifth highest total of all 67 counties in the state, according to the Department of Health. Pinellas County, which currently counts 342 positive COVID-19 patients, saw the largest local increase Saturday with 24 new cases, including a detention deputy at the Pinellas County Jail.

The deputy last worked at the jail on March 19, 2020, and the Florida Department of Health identified two days of concern where the deputy could have spread the virus, Pinellas County Sheriff Bob Gualtieri said. All inmates and staff who came in contact with the deputy during those two days have been cleared by the county's branch of the Department of Health after testing negative for the virus.

"The deputy is recovering and will remain out of work for the foreseeable future," a statement from the Sheriff's office said. "There is no indication anyone else at the jail is at risk."

The state's Department of Corrections reported on Saturday the first case of a prison inmate contracting the virus. There was little information available about the case by Saturday evening, but the department did report that the inmate is located at Blackwater River Correctional Facility, a privately-operated prison in Milton, Fla. owned by The Geo Group Inc.

Pinellas County has seen seven people die after contracting COVID-19, compared to five in Hillsborough and two in Pasco. Pasco County has reported 90 positive cases and 18 hospitalizations to the Department of Health and Hernando reported 40 cases, eight hospitalizations and, thus far, no deaths.

To the south, Manatee County has reported 129 coronavirus cases, 28 hospitalizations and three deaths.

The climb in cases is familiar news by now, a combination of factors including expanded testing in the last week - Florida tallied more than 15,000 tests in just the last day - and continual community spread.

More than 107,300 tests have been conducted, with about 10.8 percent returning positive. Gov. Ron DeSantis touted in a news release Saturday night that Florida now ranks second only to New York in the nation in terms of the number of tests administered.

Tests have largely been given to people experiencing more serious symptoms. Many people with milder cases, or without symptoms, have not been able to see if they are carriers of the virus, even if they believe they contracted it.

And the state has not yet released data on people who tested positive but got better. The governor has said he is asking about that data himself.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced new federal guidelines Friday recommending that all Americans cover their faces in public, especially in areas hit hard by the spread of the virus. The CDC recommends non-medical masks or makeshift coverings - such as scarves, T-shirts or bandannas - that protect the nose and mouth.

Dr. Douglas Holt, Director of the Health Department's Hillsborough County office, told the county's Emergency Policy Group this week that the number of patients testing positive for COVID-19 appears to be doubling every six days. Last week, health officials reported an average of 15 new coronavirus cases every day, Holt said. This week, the average is closer to 30 cases each day.

"The COVID-19 virus is demonstrating it's much more insidious and contagious in its transmission prior to any illness occurring," Holt said.

Hillsborough County's hospitals are currently in possession of 224 ventilators, Holt said, and his office is expecting a shipment of 500 additional ventilators from the state. The county also received an additional 1,000 test collection kits, putting the current supply of available tests at more than 2,000.

That should allow the county to continue collecting samples from suspected COVID-19 patients through next Wednesday, said Director of Emergency Operations Tim Dudley. The biggest hurdle now facing county health officials is the turnaround time for getting back results.

Tampa General Hospital is now able to return test results within 24 hours - by far the fastest turnaround in the county. But the hospital is also extremely limited in the number of patients it can test, Dudley said. The county's Department of Health outfit can produce results within 48 hours, but with a growing backlog at the state testing centers most are still being sent to Quest Diagnostic and LabCorp, which is returning results anywhere from 5 to 7 days later.

