County officials are hoping a new COVID-19 test site set to open next week at the Mahaffey Theater will provide some relief for the growing backlog in coronavirus testing.Pinellas County Commission Chair Pat Gerard said the drive-thru site will be operated by the state, similar to the site at Raymond James Stadium."They finally came through," Gerard said. "We've been asking for months for a testing site from the state. ... For some reason we were overlooked.

Now that our numbers are soaring, they're paying attention."Gerard hopes the site will provide some relief to the rising demand. For now, getting a free test for COVID-19 this week is becoming nearly impossible in Tampa Bay.As of Wednesday morning, multiple testing providers do not have appointments available until next week or a week after.The Pinellas Department of Health, which offers drive-thru testing at multiple locations, could not book an appointment before July 9. The earliest appointment slot in Hillsborough County, which recently expanded to testing more than 1,000 people a day, is July 15.CVS Health only allows people to book three days out, but a check of 27 sites in the Tampa Bay area all yielded the same response: "There are no available times at this location."BayCare Health offers testing on a first-come, first-served basis, but has a limited amount of tests available each day. Officials had to turn cars away from the Tropicana Field testing site after reaching capacity around 8 am. Monday and Tuesday. People started lining up before the sun rose in hopes of securing one of the coveted spots. Wednesday saw some decreased demand, with the site closing as scheduled at 11 a.m."The numbers are going up, people are concerned and they want to get tested," Hillsborough County Commission Chair Les Miller said. "I wish there was more we could do. My concern right now is will we run out of the tests. That's the scary part right now, but it's just the demand."Both Gerard and Miller encouraged people to stay home, wear masks, wash their hands and continue to social distance, especially in light of the inability to schedule a test this week.Cases have spiked in Tampa Bay and Florida throughout much of June, with the state tallying nearly 100,000 new cases in the past month. The past two weeks have seen at least 2,000 cases reported in Florida each day, with a record-setting 9,585 cases Saturday.St. Petersburg Emergency Manager Amber Boulding said the goal is to have the Mahaffey Theater test site open by the end of next week, but stressed that many of the details and logistics are still being finalized.The plan is for drive-thru testing to take place in the parking garage, which provides cover from summer heat and thunder storms, Boulding said.The goal is to conduct about 2,000 tests per day and to expand the hours so that people who work during the day have a chance to get tested in the evening.Similar to the Trop site, testing will be first-come, first-served, not appointment-based, Boulding said."I understand everyone's desperate and they want to be tested," Boulding said. "But we're doing everything in our power to pull the resources together and get it up off the ground by the end of next week."