As COVID-19 cases increase across Tampa Bay, so too have cases risen at local veterans hospitals and clinics.In federal veterans healthcare systems across Florida, "there has been a cumulative increase from May until today," said Mary Kay Rutan, on Wednesday. Rutan is the spokeswoman for the Veterans Affairs division that includes Florida.Charts on a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs website show a spike in cases in the past month in both the Bay Pines VA Healthcare System in St. Petersburg and the Tampa veterans healthcare system, which includes the James A. Haley Veterans' Hospital. Spokespersons from the local systems refused to divulge the numbers of new cases in June without a formal records request.The national Veterans Affairs website tracks three categories of cases:

Active: Current COVID-19 patients, who are either hospitalized or quarantined at home.Convalescent: COVID-19 patients who are either post-hospital discharge or at least 14 days past their last positive COVID-19 test. This includes all recovered patients since March.And deaths.On July 1, Florida's six federal veterans healthcare systems reported a total of 722 active cases, with 1,661 cumulative cases and 41 deaths since March. Of the active cases, 649 were veterans. Other cases include employees, veteran-employees, active-duty military and others. These figures are included the state's tracking of COVID-19 cases.The Bay Pines system, which includes hospitals and clinics in Pinellas, Manatee, Lee, Collier, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Highlands counties, reported 149 active cases on July 1, with 305 cumulative cases and five deaths since late March. Of the active cases, 139 were veterans. This system also cares for veterans in Desoto, Hardee and Hillsborough counties.The Tampa system, which includes hospitals and clinics in Hillsborough, Hernando, Pasco, Polk and Citrus counties, reported 154 active cases on July 1, with 283 cumulative cases and five deaths since late March. Of the active cases, 137 were veterans.Florida's federal veterans healthcare systems have sufficient bed capacity, Rutan said, and have surge planning in place if they need to expand bed capacity. These centers will continue to monitor case rates in their local communities and evaluate the re-introduction of elective procedures, she added. The centers resumed some elective procedures in mid-May.Spokespersons from both Bay Pines and Haley wrote in emails that they "continue to adhere to pandemic precautions that were successful in the early months of slowing the spread of COVID-19."A patient from a nearby nursing home experiencing an outbreak was transferred to the Tampa facility, accounting for its one case in the on-campus nursing home, according to the facility's spokeswoman Shayna Rodriguez in an email Monday. The Bay Pines on-campus nursing home has reported no cases of COVID-19.Everyone entering either facility is screened for exposure to the coronavirus, including getting their temperatures checked, and they are required to wear a surgical mask. Visitors are allowed in only if necessary, such as those who have a medical power of attorney for a patient. Emergency rooms and inpatient wards at both facilities have been separated into COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 areas, according to the spokespersons.The Tampa hospital has kept an operational, refrigerated morgue trailer in its loading dock since April as part of its pandemic response plan, but has not used it, Rodriguez said.At a recent virtual town hall, Bay Pines officials said in a presentation slide they are "not currently testing asymptomatic veterans at this time, due to the capacity of testing supplies, processing limitations and the need to ensure adequacy for symptomatic and those identified as priority."Anna Hancock, spokeswoman for the facility, said on Tuesday that the facility has enough testing supplies. In an email, she noted that all patients, visitors and staff members who come to Bay Pines are tested if they demonstrate symptoms."We do not automatically test all veterans who come to our campus. However, we will test asymptomatic veterans if they screen positive per the criteria," she said. "Additionally, we test all veterans who are admitted to our facilities as in-patients and who are scheduled for procedures, such as surgery."Florida's seven state-run veterans homes operate separately from the federal system. As of June 29, nine residents of state-run veterans homes were hospitalized with COVID-19, according to Steve Murray, spokesman for the Florida Department of Veterans' Affairs.Four were from the Robert H. Jenkins Jr. Veterans' Domiciliary Home in Lake City, and five were from the Alexander "Sandy" Nininger State Veterans' Nursing Home in Pembroke Pines.Thirteen COVID-19 patients of the Pembroke Pines facility and one from the Lake City facility have died since March, many of whom were in hospice, he said, and all had co-morbidities.· · ·