TAMPA - For the first 11 weeks of the season, the Lightning dodged COVID-19.

While other organizations around the league were forced to postpone games and teams shut down operations amid outbreaks, the Lightning were unaffected. They shared the ice with teams that days later lost players to positive tests.

But when the virus did hit the Lightning locker room, it spread quickly. Within the past three weeks, nine players and three coaches went into protocol, creating day-to-day - and sometimes hour-to-hour - uncertainty about who would be available to take the ice.

"I guess we expect the unexpected," forward Alex Killorn said. "Every day we come in knowing that someone might get pulled and mentally, you just kind of have to wrap your head around it knowing that the guys that are walking in in the morning may not be the guys that are going to play. We have to get these games in, we have to play them. So it's just kind of finding a way to win through these tough times."

Lightning assistant coaches found out 2 ½ hours before puck drop of the team's Dec. 21 game in Vegas that coach Jon Cooper had tested positive. The Lightning returned from the holiday break on Dec. 26 to a practice missing four players - including both goaltenders.

Forward Anthony Cirelli was pulled out of a team meeting because he tested positive, and forward Ross Colton was told he had to enter protocol after coming off the ice for morning skate before Tuesday's game in Columbus.

Even when players were able to return, it wasn't seamless. Rookie forward Taylor Raddysh was cleared Monday. He made it for that day's practice, but his equipment bag didn't.

"There's just been a lot of disruption," Cooper said. "We've had a multitude of players come in. Different guys are playing games, guys are getting their first games in. You don't know who's playing hours before the game."

The Lightning revolving roster door coincided with their most uneven play of the season. They went winless in three straight games and were outscored a combined 17-6 in a lopsided loss to the Panthers and two setbacks to the Rangers.

Adding to the frustration, player returns depended not on whether they felt sick - they reported few to no symptoms - but by their daily test results.

On Dec. 29, the NHL shortened its mandatory isolation period from 10 days to five days, but exiting protocol still wasn't as easy as circling a date on the calendar.

Anyone in protocol can test daily starting the day after infection. Two negative lab-based PCR tests done 24 hours apart - provided the individuals are asymptomatic or their symptoms are resolved - would allow them to be cleared before the sixth day.

On the sixth day, they test daily to either produce one lab-based PCR test that is negative or has a cycle threshold (CT) value over 30, or have two negative rapid point-of-care tests collected more than two hours apart. Individuals also need to be cleared by the team physician.

The CT value is key because PCR tests can still find traces of the virus weeks and months after infection. CT value is a marker for how much, or little, viral genetic material can be detected; the higher the number the better. So even if there is some virus detected in a PCR test, if it's above a certain CT value, an individual is not considered infectious.

"I didn't have any symptoms," Cirelli said. "I felt pretty good throughout the week and I tested every day, just to get that number up and see where it's at."

Most Lightning players and coaches returned within the five-day mark. Goaltender Andrei Vasilevskiy returned after seven days in protocol, and assistant coach Zettler took eight days to test out.

"You're just anxious," Zettler said. "When you wake up in the morning, and you feel good, you feel normal, you feel like you could go work out, you feel like you could just go out and have a normal day and you can't because your test shows that you can't. It's obviously frustrating.

"And I had three or four days of that where I felt like, 'OK, I'm ready to go here,' and I just wasn't able to because I didn't test out."

The Lightning are a fully-vaccinated team, and many players received boosters when the team made them available earlier in the season. Now those who have returned from protocol don't have to test for the next 90 days.

Entering Saturday's game against the Bruins, 11 of the 12 players who went into protocol are back. Colton is the only one yet to be cleared. The return of key players like Nikita Kucherov, Brayden Point and Erik Cernak from injury have the Lightning feeling whole again, and they hope their COVID issues are mostly behind them.

"I'm not worried about testing anymore, so that's a good thing," said defenseman Mikhail Sergachev, who went through protocol. "It sucks that it's the second year in a row that we have to do the same things and postpone the games and not play the games and guys have to sit out even though everybody's been vaccinated three times already. ...

"I can't really judge what the NHL is thinking, but everybody's getting sick of it."