The coronavirus is once again messing with Tampa's stage schedules.

The David A. Straz Jr. Center for the Performing Arts postponed Jobsite Theater's production of Romeo & Juliet by a week in January. And a show called Drag Queen Christmas got canceled on Monday because some of the cast and crew tested positive.

"The Straz Center's rigorous testing protocols caught positive cases before anyone on the production team entered our facility and prevented any spread of positive cases," a statement from the center said.

The Straz Center has one of the more robust coronavirus policies among entertainment venues in the Tampa Bay area. When it reopened this fall after its curtains were closed for months because of the COVID-19 pandemic, it made testing and vaccine cards a condition for entry. Attendees age 12 and older must show a vaccine card or proof of a negative COVID-19 test for all indoor performances. Also, face masks are required for both the audience and staff inside the theaters.

David Jenkins, the producing artistic director of Jobsite Theater, the independent resident theater company of the Straz, said a member of his crew tested positive, so work had to stop for a week because of exposure. The person was vaccinated and is asymptomatic, he said.

The past few weeks have brought some high-profile cancellations in entertainment, including Saturday Night Live sending its audience and most of its cast home, and some Broadway shows have gone dark in New York. They were prompted by the recent spike in cases brought on by the omicron variant of COVID-19.

Jenkins said considering the vigorous program in place at the Straz, a postponement rather than cancellation was in line with advice from Tampa General Hospital.

"In 16 months, this is first time we had a failed test," Jenksins said. "We've done everything right, and because this person is vaccinated they are not sick."

But he said he had to consider the families of the 13 actors and crew in calling for the postponement. He thinks Jobsite's audience will support that.

"Our audience has been incredibly understanding and I think, frankly, more comfortable coming to the theater because of the steps we are taking," Jenkins said. "People who complain on social media were not buying tickets to the theater to begin with and are not our customers."

Previews planned for Jan. 12-13 of Romeo & Juliet will be moved to Jan. 19-20, and opening night will be moved from Jan. 14 to Jan. 21. Anyone holding a ticket to performances Jan. 12-16 will be contacted about moving to another date. Tickets start at $18.